 # JAVA LANGUAGE LESSON 1

## WHAT IS JAVASCRIPT ?

JavaScript is a dynamic computer programming language. It is lightweight and most commonly used as a part of web pages, whose implementations allow client-side script to interact with the user and make dynamic pages. It is an interpreted programming language with object-oriented capabilities.

JavaScript was first known as LiveScript, but Netscape changed its name to JavaScript, possibly because of the excitement being generated by Java. JavaScript made its first appearance in Netscape 2.0 in 1995 with the name LiveScript. The general-purpose core of the language has been embedded in Netscape, Internet Explorer, and other web browsers.

The ECMA-262 Specification defined a standard version of the core JavaScript language.

 - JavaScript is a lightweight, interpreted programming language.
 - Designed for creating network-centric applications.
 - Complementary to and integrated with Java.
 - Complementary to and integrated with HTML.
 - Open and cross-platform

## SYNTAX

JavaScript can be implemented using JavaScript statements that are placed within the <script>... </script> HTML tags in a web page.

You can place the <script> tags, containing your JavaScript, anywhere within your web page, but it is normally recommended that you should keep it within the <head> tags.

The <script> tag alerts the browser program to start interpreting all the text between these tags as a script. A simple syntax of your JavaScript will appear as follows.

```
<script ...>
   JavaScript code
</script>
```

The script tag takes two important attributes 

 - **Language** − This attribute specifies what scripting language you are using. Typically, its value will be javascript. Although recent versions of HTML (and XHTML, its successor) have phased out the use of this attribute.

 - **Type** − This attribute is what is now recommended to indicate the scripting language in use and its value should be set to "text/javascript".

So your JavaScript segment will look like −

```
<script language = "javascript" type = "text/javascript">
   JavaScript code
</script>
```

### Your First JavaScript Code

Let us take a sample example to print out "Hello World". We added an optional HTML comment that surrounds our JavaScript code. This is to save our code from a browser that does not support JavaScript. The comment ends with a "//-->". Here "//" signifies a comment in JavaScript, so we add that to prevent a browser from reading the end of the HTML comment as a piece of JavaScript code. Next, we call a function document.write which writes a string into our HTML document.

This function can be used to write text, HTML, or both. Take a look at the following code.

```
<html>
   <body>   
      <script language = "javascript" type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            document.write("Hello World!")
         //-->
      </script>      
   </body>
</html>
```

This code will produce the following result;

```
Hello World!
```


## PLACEMENT

There is a flexibility given to include JavaScript code anywhere in an HTML document. However the most preferred ways to include JavaScript in an HTML file are as follows;

 - Script in (<head>...</head>) section.

 - Script in <body>...</body> section.

 - Script in <body>...</body> and <head>...</head> sections.

 - Script in an external file and then include in <head>...</head> section.

In the following section, we will see how we can place JavaScript in an HTML file in different ways.


### JavaScript in head.../head

If you want to have a script run on some event, such as when a user clicks somewhere, then you will place that script in the head as follows;

```
<html>
   <head>      
      <script type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            function sayHello() {
               alert("Hello World")
            }
         //-->
      </script>     
   </head>
   
   <body>
      <input type = "button" onclick = "sayHello()" value = "Say Hello" />
   </body>  
</html>
```

### JavaScript in body.../body

If you need a script to run as the page loads so that the script generates content in the page, then the script goes in the <body> portion of the document. In this case, you would not have any function defined using JavaScript. Take a look at the following code.

```
<html>
   <head>
   </head>
   
   <body>
      <script type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            document.write("Hello World")
         //-->
      </script>
      
      <p>This is web page body </p>
   </body>
</html>
```

### JavaScript in body and head

You can put your JavaScript code in <head> and <body> section altogether as follows;

```
<html>
   <head>
      <script type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            function sayHello() {
               alert("Hello World")
            }
         //-->
      </script>
   </head>
   
   <body>
      <script type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            document.write("Hello World")
         //-->
      </script>
      
      <input type = "button" onclick = "sayHello()" value = "Say Hello" />
   </body>
</html>
```


## VARIABLES

Like many other programming languages, JavaScript has variables. Variables can be thought of as named containers. You can place data into these containers and then refer to the data simply by naming the container.

Before you use a variable in a JavaScript program, you must declare it. Variables are declared with the var keyword as follows.

```
<script type = "text/javascript">
   <!--
      var money;
      var name;
   //-->
</script>
```

You can also declare multiple variables with the same var keyword as follows;

```
<script type = "text/javascript">
   <!--
      var money, name;
   //-->
</script>
```

Storing a value in a variable is called variable initialization. You can do variable initialization at the time of variable creation or at a later point in time when you need that variable.

For instance, you might create a variable named money and assign the value 2000.50 to it later. For another variable, you can assign a value at the time of initialization as follows.


```
<script type = "text/javascript">
   <!--
      var name = "Ali";
      var money;
      money = 2000.50;
   //-->
</script>
```

**Note** − Use the **var** keyword only for declaration or initialization, once for the life of any variable name in a document. You should not re-declare same variable twice.

JavaScript is **untyped** language. This means that a JavaScript variable can hold a value of any data type. Unlike many other languages, you don't have to tell JavaScript during variable declaration what type of value the variable will hold. The value type of a variable can change during the execution of a program and JavaScript takes care of it automatically.


### Datatypes

One of the most fundamental characteristics of a programming language is the set of data types it supports. These are the type of values that can be represented and manipulated in a programming language.

JavaScript allows you to work with three primitive data types.

 - **Numbers**, eg. 123, 120.50 etc.

 - **Strings** of text e.g. "This text string" etc.

 - **Boolean** e.g. true or false.

JavaScript also defines two trivial data types, **null** and **undefined**, each of which defines only a single value. In addition to these primitive data types, JavaScript supports a composite data type known as object. We will cover objects in detail in a separate chapter.

**Note** − JavaScript does not make a distinction between integer values and floating-point values. All numbers in JavaScript are represented as floating-point values. JavaScript represents numbers using the 64-bit floating-point format defined by the IEEE 754 standard.


### Variable Scope

The scope of a variable is the region of your program in which it is defined. JavaScript variables have only two scopes.

 - **Global Variables** − A global variable has global scope which means it can be defined anywhere in your JavaScript code.

 - **Local Variables** − A local variable will be visible only within a function where it is defined. Function parameters are always local to that function.

Within the body of a function, a local variable takes precedence over a global variable with the same name. If you declare a local variable or function parameter with the same name as a global variable, you effectively hide the global variable. Take a look into the following example.

```
<html>
   <body onload = checkscope();>   
      <script type = "text/javascript">
         <!--
            var myVar = "global";      // Declare a global variable
            function checkscope( ) {
               var myVar = "local";    // Declare a local variable
               document.write(myVar);
            }
         //-->
      </script>     
   </body>
</html>
```

This produces the following result.

```
local
```


### Variable Names

While naming your variables in JavaScript, keep the following rules in mind.

 - You should not use any of the JavaScript reserved keywords as a variable name. These keywords are mentioned in the next section. For example, **break** or **boolean** variable names are not valid.

 - JavaScript variable names should not start with a numeral (0-9). They must begin with a letter or an underscore character. For example, **123test** is an invalid variable name but **_123test** is a valid one.

 - JavaScript variable names are case-sensitive. For example, **Name** and **name** are two different variables.


### Reserved Words

A list of all the reserved words in JavaScript are given in the following table. They cannot be used as JavaScript variables, functions, methods, loop labels, or any object names.


```
abstract	else		instanceof	switch
boolean		enum		int		synchronized
break		export		interface	this
byte		extends		long		throw
case		false		native		throws
catch		final		new		transient
char		finally		null		true
class		float		package		try
const		for		private		typeof
continue	function	protected	var
debugger	goto		public		void
default		if		return		volatile
delete		implements	short		while
do		import		static		with
double		in		super	
```


